I've always been fascinated by stories of time travel, and I'm not
alone. They're [?compelling] as intellectual puzzles -- search the
internet for any of the movies in my chart and you'll find diagrams,
timelines, theories, speculation. But they're also a way to explore
some of our most powerful human questions about history, causality,
agency, and self. How much do circumstances matter? Is history
inevitable, cyclical, mutable, or random? What if your parents had
never met? What if you could erase what you said at last week's party?
What if Napoleon never invaded Russia? What if you could get advice
from your future self?

* Puzzles & Paradoxes 


The paradox is really the pathos of intellectual life and just as only
great souls are exposed to passions it is only the great thinker who
is exposed to what I call paradoxes, which are nothing else than
grandiose thoughts in embryo. -Soren Kierkegaard

The possibility of time travel, of course, implies the possibility of
logical inconsistencies. There's the "bootstrap paradox", in which an
object or piece of information is taken back in time, and this then
becomes/always was the origin of this object as received by the time
traveler. There's also the "grandfather paradox," in which a time
traveler could go back in time, kill their parent or grandparent
before the time traveler is born, and then never exist in the first
(or is that last?) place in order to travel back in time and prevent
themselves from existing. The Futurama episode "Roswell that Ends
Well" combines these ideas by having Fry *become* his own grandfather
through, as he puts it, "do[ing] the nasty in the pasty" with his
then-young grandmother. Paradoxes are disturbing -- almost incestuous
-- because they fly in the face of our human desires to process
everything we experience via an unattainable perfectly consistent
framework.

In actual physics [footnote: not an actual physicist], relativity
seems to indicate that a kind of travel through time might in fact be
possible, via "wormholes" or "closed time-like curves" in
four-dimensional space. The so-called "Novikov self-consistency
principle" attempts to deal with this by suggesting that a universe
with these features would be naturally self-correcting; every initial
trajectory into a wormhole must have a self-consistent extension. But
most fiction about time travel doesn't address a universe that's
consistent and self-correcting in this way, because it's not as
narratively interesting. We want to feel powerful; fictional time
travel is more a fantasy of impossible course-correction than an
attempt at a consistent model.

Sometimes the puzzles and paradoxes -- time trips that tickle our
brains -- are the main attraction. Primer and Bender's Big Score are
opposites in some ways. Primer takes time travel seriously (tagline:
"what if it works?") and presents a gritty, scientific, and exacting
depiction of time travel that's often praised as the most "realistic"
piece in the genre. Bender's Big Score is a cartoon romp involving
time paradox duplicates who are doomed to die, a robot who plunders
history for its physical valuables, and a temporary-tattoo time code
that has no logical origin. But both movies are particularly appealing
to logical thinkers and puzzle buffs, who will find a challenge in
sorting out all of their loops and loops-within-loops and weird yet
somehow logical subversions of causality. These are the kind of movies
that prompt long circular forum threads arguing about what "really"
happened.

* Family and Familiars

"The first half of our life is ruined by our parents and the second
half by our children." - Clarence S. Darrow

Time travel stories often deal with themes of parents and ancestors --
and not just because it's an excuse to duplicate actors for roles in
the same movie. When we think about the past or the future, we often
imagine our ancestors or possible descendants; time travellers can
actually meet their parents or children at their current age (Back to
the Future) or create a non-traditional family spaced across time
(Terminator).

Terminator's Kyle travels back in time to save post-singularity hero
John Connor's mother Sarah from the Terminator who has been sent back
in time to kill her. Because John Connor sent Kyle back in time, Kyle
connects with Sarah and becomes John's father, enmeshing all three in
a circular loop of causality and parenthood. In a way, John Connor has
been able to choose his own parentage -- as an adult, he shaped the
young man who would later become his father, 

BTTF's Marty has to *avoid* the Oedipal temptations of his teenage
mother's attraction to him, since the story's logic dictates that he
will cease to exist in 1985 if his father and mother don't get
together in 1955 -- but spending time with his teenage parents gives
him a more sympathetic perspective on his adult parents when he
returns to his present. Although he has no choice of who to be born
to, he is able to make small positive changes in his young parents' lives.

"As far as ... consciousness can be extended backwards to any past
action or thought, so far reaches the identity of that person; it is
the same self now it was then; and it is by the same self with this
present one that now reflects on it, that that action was done." --
John Locke

Sometimes time travelers are contrasted with their parents, but
sometimes they're contrasted with themselves. The literary device of
the doppelganger, or "double walker", is used to explore the ways in
which one person often feels like a split self, with the doppleganger
often playing an evil "shadow" self. Time travelers can be
literally of two minds, fighting with a version of themself from a
short time away (Primer, Bender's Big Score), or they can confront a
generationally-separated version of themself from decades in the
future/past (Looper).

We often wonder if we're going to repeat the mistakes of our past self
in another context. Looper avoids much discussion of time travel
mechanics, but makes it clear early on that the timeline can be
changed; the young version of time traveler Joe can send messages to
his future self by carving them on his own skin, and the messages then
appear on the older self at the same "time". In the movie's climactic
showdown, older and wiser Joe chooses a drastic and self-sacrificing
way to change the events of the next thirty years -- in contrast to
younger Joe's selfish and irresponsible ways.

In Primer, the two scientists begin as similar men with slightly
divergent priorities; they bicker over the use of their time
travel device (and perhaps even over the family that only one of them
has). By the movie's end, each faces and fights a time duplicate of
himself for control of these same things -- and in this case, the
older self is not necessarily wiser. Watching a person literally
fight themselves contradicts the idea that a person has one self that's
consistent over time, and tempts us to break from our past selves and
deny responsibility for their actions.

* History's Mysteries

"What if some day or night a demon were to steal after you into your
loneliest loneliness and say to you: "This life as you now live it and
have lived it, you will have to live once more and innumerable ties
more; and there will be nothing new in it, but every pain and every
joy and every thought and sigh and ewverything unutterably small or
great in your life will have to return to you"... how well disposed
would you have to become to yourself and to live to crave nothing more
fervently than this ultimate eternal confirmation and seal?" - Nietschze

"Those who do not know history are condemned to repeat it." We review
the events of our past in our minds in order to make sure we've learned
from them. This theme is most obvious on a personal level in
"Groundhog Day" and "Peggy Sue Got Married", two films about deeply
burrowing into the inner psyche. 

In Groundhog Day, weatherman Phil's journey through a near-endless
loop of February 2nds is a long internal process that ends with his
painstaking orchestration of a perfect day; very slowly, over many
repetitions, he starts to recognize the consequences of his abrasive
personality and grow and change into the man his colleague Rita can
fall in love with. This movie gives a slower and more linear
perspective than Primer on the ways the same person can be drastically
different from themselves.

43-year-old Peggy Sue, about to divorce the high school sweetheart she
married years ago, gets a chance to rethink her teenage choices.
She makes many of the same decisions, even with her
mature perspective and knowledge of future consequences;
recontextualized, they become more satisfying. Although Peggy Sue
retains the knowledge and experience of her 43-year-old self when
traveling back to 1960, her body and circumstances are that of her
17-year-old self -- the differences from the "real" 17-year-old Peggy
are profound, but obvious only to Peggy herself. Both Peggy and Phil
have to go alone in their travels, bringing only the knowledge in
their heads, and both journeys come to an end only when the character
has completed a key psychological transformation. Both suggest that a
good decision is a decision you'd make again if you had it to do over
again; Peggy affirms her good decisions, while Phil corrects his bad ones.


"He who cannot draw on three thousand years of history is living from
hand to mouth." -- Goethe

Some time travelers, uninterested in or incapable of changing things,
are essentially tourists in the past. In Bill and Ted's Excellent
Adventure, the teen slackers need to pass a history report, so they go
straight to the source and bring Napoleon, Lincoln, Joan of Arc, and
others forward in time. By observing these historical characters in
their world of 1990s San Dimas, they are able to understand the
historical figures more directly and effectively than when they try to
study from books.

The Star Trek crew needs some whales, which are extinct in the 23rd
century, so they head back to 1986 to pick some up (although this
setup undermines the movie's attempt at a heavy-handed "save the
whales" message; 20th/21st century humans will destroy the whales, but
that's okay because we can just pick up some whales in the past).
These travelers are visiting their society's history, not their
personal history, and observing rather than changing the past (though
both use the narrative device of an urgent need in the future to
motivate the travel).

Humans are always making movies in our heads -- part of our incredible
capacity for abstraction. More than any other animal, we are capable
of visualizing ourselves into our own pasts, our society's history, or
our potential future. Stories about time travel are a cool way to
literalize these ideas and help us process our decisions and
circumstances. With these movies I've just scratched the surface of
fascinating time travel tales; so hop in your DeLorean, storage unit,
phone booth, or time-code force field and check out the past and the
future.
