* 3 hours
1. Localize the Bulletin Board by town
Every ad would be associated to a town & state
The Bulletin Board page would be organized based on the town a user is in
If there is no content for that town, then we would present the content from the closest towns near it
There would also be a category of “universal” content: content that is not location-based and could appear anywhere

* 3 hours
Pricing would be based on number of towns posted in
1 town
3 towns 
5 towns
10 towns
everywhere

Pick via drop down menu or map or by entering town names.
Non-profits get 3 towns free.

Town localization on BB would be linked to town localization on home page.

* 2 hours
2. Integrate social media
Log in with Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter
* 2 hours
Upload your contacts from any of these and your own address book
* 4 hours
Share a job you just posted on any of the social media networks above
Share a rating/recommendation just received on social media
Share you got hired for a job or found someone on social media
Share you found someone for a job on social media
Share your ad on social media, including pinterest

Rules: we do not share anything automatically. When a user action is registered, we give the user the option to share that action on his social media network. Default is to Ask every time. (Can include a checkbox offering to share this type of post on this network automatically in the future, but default is to ask every time.)
* 4 hours
Enable users to post content from their social media to HelpAroundTown. e.g. Facebook comments, LinkedIn endorsements, could go on HelpAroundTown profiles & ads
* 3 hours
Show in a user’s HelpAroundTown profile or ad how many other users are friends on Fbk or LinkedIn. 
* 6 hours
3. Enable vouching
Enable users to vouch for one another. Show on profile or ad. Highest level of trust.
(See couchsurfing)
* 2 hours
4. Enable comments on ads
SO people can recommend an advertiser.
* 4 hours
Enable google & yelp reviews if advertiser so chooses?
* 5 hours
enable native reviews.
* ??? not enough info
5. Show service provider profiles who have so elected
Similar to BB look & feel, but better categories. Word cloud??
= Who’s available? page
* 5 hours
6. Redesign home page
localized by town
include weather, social media feeds (Twitter; maybe Facebook), news feed
Separate ads into Who’s Available? Events, Services, Products, special deals, Yard sale.
